---
layout: post
title: 'Git: How to Do Things'
excerpt: |
    If you use [git](http://git-scm.com), you might occasionally need to do things. This post explains how to do things with git.
---
Have you ever tried to do something with [git][] but you didn't know how? Look no further! This is a comprehensive guide to doing things using git.

[git]: http://git-scm.com

Be sure to bookmark this page. Studies have shown that it's completely impossible to remember anything about git ever, so you will definitely need it again.

## Revert your changes to a file

To revert to the committed version of `file.txt`, try using [the obvious
command](http://selenic.com/hg/help/revert):

    $ git revert file.txt
    fatal: bad revision 'file.txt'

When git prints a complete non-sequitur, fly into a momentary micro-rage directed at nothing in particular. It's clearly git's fault, or your shell's fault, or a cosmic ray.

At this point, it can be helpful to remember that you're an ape sitting in a chair, pushing small buttons with your fingers and staring straight ahead.

After you've calmed down, type a random series of letters and punctuation:

    $ git checkout HEAD -- file.txt

## Revert all your changes to all the files

Okay, okay, you totally got this one. Just [leave off the filename](http://selenic.com/hg/help/revert) to revert everything:

    $ git checkout HEAD
    error: pathspec 'HEAD' did not match any file(s) known to git.
    
Of course not. The problem here is that you have no idea how to use computers anymore; you're getting old and should probably give up the trade. You can probably find work as an at-home envelope stuffer or a furniture-discount sign-waver.

In case those careers don't work out, though, you'll need to remember a completely different git command:

    $ git reset --hard

The next step is to realize that your changes are completely gone forever with no [backups](http://selenic.com/hg/help/revert) to speak of. Consider that life is transition and that attachment can only lead to pain.

## Send a new branch to the server

One way to do this would be to use a [flag on the `push` command](http://selenic.com/hg/help/push) indicating that there's a new branch:

    $ git push --new-branch

But that would clearly be wrong. Instead, you instruct git to set the branch's upstream remote to the remote you're pushing to and then, after that, type the name of the branch (this is just for fun, presumably):

    $ git push --set-upstream origin why-must-i-endure-this-daily-torment

## Tell git not to add a file after all

Say you've added a file but then you change your mind. This one should be easy; git ships with 159 built-in commands (not a joke), so there's probably [a command](http://selenic.com/hg/help/forget) for doing that!

    $ git forget file.txt
    git: 'forget' is not a git command. See 'git --help'.

The git developers disrespect you. They have been calling you cheap behind your back, writing checks in your name, and spreading rumors about the way you treat other people's pets. Truly disgusting. They made this flag up to [gaslight][] you:

    $ git rm --cached file.txt

[gaslight]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaslighting

## Do exactly the thing you meant to do all along, seriously

As an adorable little reminder of the worthlessness of all human toil, git has laid a few fun "traps" for you along the way. A randomly selected subset of git commands work most of the time but silently do the wrong thing just when you need them most:

* `git clone` usually works but produces broken repositories when there are submodules. This is a particularly [funny joke](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3796927/how-to-git-clone-including-submodules) to play on undergrads, advisors, git newcomers, and all other humans. Do *not* tell them about the `--recursive` flag.
* `git push`'s cute little trick is pushing everything but the tags! Hilarious! Use `--tags` if you [hate fun](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2988088/do-git-tags-get-pushed-as-well).
* `git init` produces a repository that can push, pull, and do almost anything else. But if you want a real scream, try pushing *to* that repository! Ha! Ha ha ha! Ha! The `init` command has made a funny joke in which it is impossible to do that [seemingly obvious thing](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1764380/push-to-non-bare-repository)! Ha! This is especially funny because it is sort of the whole point of using distributed version control! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Use `--bare`.
