---
title: Is JavaScript Statically or Dynamically Scoped?
highlight: true
excerpt: |
    [Cornell's CS 6110][CS 6110] gives a pretty solid definition of static and dynamic scoping for the λ-calculus, but I also wanted to give an example of static scoping in a real language. I wrestle with JavaScript, which has a little bit of both.

    [CS 6110]: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs6110/2018sp/
---
It's hard to define many of the terms we use to classify programming languages. I still don't really know what people mean by *strongly* vs. *weakly typed*, and *interpreted* vs. *compiled* is certainly a gray-area bugaboo.

In [CS 6110][], we [define *static* vs. *dynamic* or *lexical* scoping][lec12] precisely for the λ-calculus. Here's a flimsy, informal definition. Scoping decides which value you get when you look up the variable. Static scoping matches variable references to assignments using the structure of your program text: the "nearest" definition wins. Dynamic scoping uses execution time: it gives you the value that you most recently assigned to a given name.

But how does our definition apply to real programming languages? As an example, let's try to decide whether JavaScript is statically or dynamically scoped.


## A Litmus Test

Let's start with the example λ-calculus term from the course notes:

```none
let n = 12 in
let f = λx. n + x in
let n = 17 in
f 30
```

This is an applied λ-calculus extended with `let`, but you can imagine the [desugared][lec11] version. Our notes say that an ordinary evaluation, and a trivial OCaml translation, will produce 42. Both the λ-calculus and OCaml are statically scoped, so the value for `n` comes from the nearest definition in the program text (12), not the most recent assignment in time (17).

Let's try translating that example into JavaScript:

```typescript
n = 12;
function addn(m) {
    return n + m;
}
n = 17;
console.log(addn(30));
```

You can give it a try, but (spoilers) this program prints 47. So is JavaScript dynamically scoped?

One of JavaScript's many quirks is that undeclared variable references implicitly refer to global variables. If you run that example in a browser, when we say `n = 17`, the compiler executes it as `window.n = 17`, assigning a field on a global `window` object. There is only one global `n` here, and the reference to it gets the most recent value we assigned to that field. Because a plain `=` expression just assigns to a variable, rather than declaring a new one, there is only one `n` here and the execution *feels* dynamically scoped.

Nobody likes global variables, of course, and modern JavaScript's [strict mode][] prohibits this weird implicit behavior. Surely we can get static scoping by sprinkling [`var`][var] in:

```typescript
var n = 12;
function addn(m) {
    return n + m;
}
var n = 17;
console.log(addn(30));
```

You can try this one too, but it also prints 47. You can even take other standard JavaScript advice to avoid top-level `function` declarations and use modern arrow syntax:

```typescript
var n = 12;
var addn = (m) => {
    return n + m;
}
var n = 17;
console.log(addn(30));
```

But you'll still get 47. Is JavaScript *really* dynamically scoped?

The problem here is `var`'s [hoisting][], a questionable feature that pushes declarations to the "top" of the scope. So this example hasn't *really* demonstrated dynamic scoping; it's just overwriting the first `n` declaration with the second one. JavaScript has again given us access to only a single variable called `n`. The `var` statements look like declarations, but they’re invisibly transformed into assignments to the same variable. Mutating that single variable gives the impression that we have dynamic scope.

Following still more modern JavaScript advice, you can try replacing `var` with [`let`][let], which does not hoist:

```typescript
let n = 12;
let addn = (m) => {
    return n + m;
}
let n = 17;
console.log(addn(30));
```

But instead of printing 42, Node says:

```none
SyntaxError: Identifier 'n' has already been declared
```

which is a reasonable position to take, but it doesn't help us decide whether JavaScript is statically scoped. We need a different tactic.


## A Proper Desugaring

The problem with all of these examples it that I haven't faithfully translated my original λ-calculus into JavaScript. I assumed that the λ-calculus `let` construct could map directly onto JavaScript's `let`. But a more faithful translation of `let x = e1 in e2` would use function application instead:

```typescript
(x => e2)(e1)
```

So let's try translating that example again:

```typescript
(n => {
    (addn => {
        (n => {
            console.log(addn(30))
        })(17)
    })(m => n + m)
})(12)
```

It's not pretty, but it finally prints 42. For function arguments, at least, JavaScript has static scope.


## A Sibling Scope

To write a nicer example that involves `var` but still demonstrates static scope, we can abandon the idea that we can redefine `n` in the reference's *parent* scope. Instead, let's assign to it in a *sibling* scope in a separate function:

```typescript
var n = 12;
function addn(m) {
    return n + m;
}
function setn() {
    var n = 17;
}
setn();
console.log(addn(30));
```

While it's a little more complicated than our original example, it does print 42, like all good programs.

If you remove the `var` keyword, of course, you can still get a global variable and 47 as output. Dynamic scope always lurks.

[CS 6110]: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs6110/2018sp/
[lec11]: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs6110/2018sp/lectures/lec11.pdf
[lec12]: http://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs6110/2018sp/lectures/lec12.pdf
[strict mode]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Strict_mode
[var]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/var
[hoisting]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/var#var_hoisting
[let]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/let
