---
title: "Notes on WAX 2016"
excerpt: |
    TK
---
Introductions. We had people say what they liked most and least about the topic. Themes:
- Hasn't hit it big yet, commercially.
- Hating on the terminology. "Approximate computing" itself has problems.

Matthai. Approximation from the hardware design of the camera sensor to the machine learning algorithms. A situation where approximation is critical---can't get the job done currently under the energy and cloud cost constraints.

Naveen. Focus on *data-driven hardware resilience*, where you train a machine learning algorithm to counteract the effects of deterministic hardware approximation. Can lead to extremely good tolerance under the right conditions.

Lara & the unrealized connections to information theory.

A potential "best practices" document.
- Standard benchmarks
- Standard QoS metrics and bounds
- Mapping the space of techniques available (if you want to apply approximation to your favorite application)
- What kind of guarantees should we be striving for? Basically no one believes non-statistical, totally deterministic.

Things I learned about running the conference.
- I love lightning talks, but (a) people put too much effort into them, so we didn't have enough, and (b) reports were that 60 seconds is not enough to get enough interesting stuff across.
- More discussion. Can we get round tables? Questions on cards? The closest we got was the lunchtime discussion, which people liked, especially the "new people."
- Remind people to skip the background/motivation in their talks.
- Get more serious about the organization so more people take on the work, so we can scale up the workshop.
